## Outline

![Overview of `kmerslay extract-coding` **A.** First, each read is translated into all six possible protein-coding translation frames. Next, reading frames with stop codons are eliminated. Each protein-coding frame is $k$-merized, then the fraction of $k$-mers which appear in the known protein-coding database is computed. Frames which contain a fraction of coding frames exceeding the threshold are inferred to be putatively protein-coding. **B.** Worked example of an RNA-seq read with a single putatitive reading frame. **C.** Worked example of an RNA-seq read with multiple reading frames, and a UCSC genome browser shot of the read showing that both reading frames are present in the annotation.](images/SVG/figure1.svg){#sfig:figure1 tag="figure1" width="100%"}


![Applications of `kmerslay extract-coding`. **A.** We simulated RNA-seq data using Opisthokonta species from the Quest for Orthologs dataset for true positive protein-coding RNAs, reads completely contained within intergenic, intronic, and UTR sequences as true positive noncoding RNAs, and reads partially overlapping a coding and noncoding region as an adversarial test set. We then predicted protein-coding sequences and computed false positive and false negative rates. False Positive coding reads were found to be ... False negative noncoding reads were found to be ... **B.** Number of putative protein-coding sequences per read. **C.** This method could also be used to extract only reads whose putative protein-coding sequences are transcription factors. **D.** We ran `kmerslay extract-coding` on the five tissues and nine species from the Brawand 2011 dataset.](images/SVG/figure2.svg){#sfig:figure2 tag="figure2" width="100%"}


![Overview of `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` **A.** Protein sequences are $k$-merized by converting into a bag of words using a sliding window of size $k$, potentially re-encoded to a lossy alphabet, and then their fraction of overlapping $k$-mers is computed into a Jaccard similarity. **B.** One option for `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` is to specify a pair of sequence files, and compute a background of $k$-mer similarty using randomly shuffled pairs. **C.** Another option for `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` is to do an all-by-all $k$-mer similarity comparison.](images/SVG/figure3.svg){#sfig:figure3 tag="figure3" width="100%"}

![Applications of `kmerslay compare-kmer-content`. **A.** We used `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` on pairs of orthologous protein sequences between humans and the remaining Opisthokonta species in the Quest for Orthologs dataset. x-axis, $k$-mer size, y-axis, mean difference. **B.** False positive calls by `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` are either paralogs or read-through protein products. **C.** We applied `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` to ... to find putative orthologs. We found ... the accuracy was ...](images/SVG/figure4.svg){#sfig:figure4 tag="figure4" width="100%"}
