## Introduction

Comparative transcriptomics, the study of gene expression profiles across species, provides a powerful view into the inner workings of cells, shared across millions of years of evolution.
Homology assignment, the process of identifying genes conserved within evolution, across species continues to involve the requirement for an assembled and annotated genome in the species of interest.
Unfortunately, 99.999% of the predicted 8.7 million Eukaryotic species on Earth have no submitted genome assembly [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127; @url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/browse#!/overview/], precluding the analysis of the vast majority of species on this planet.
Adding to the difficulty, there is no consensus on the "best" way to assign homology, as each researcher may have different criteria for success, as demonstrated by the Quest for Orthologs consortium [@doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.127;  @doi:10.1093/molbev/msz150; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx542; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts050; @doi:10.1186/gb-2009-10-9-403].
A promising, genome-agnostic method of assigning homology using reduced amino acid alphabets [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giz118] has shown success in quickly finding similar protein-coding seuqences.
Thus, comparative transcriptomics remains hindered due to lack of complete genomes and the unsolved homology assignment problem.

To avoid genome assembly and homology assignment, we present `kmerslay`, a method to extract putative protein-coding regions from RNA-seq reads, using reduced amino acid alphabets. `kmerslay` provides several subcommands for working with RNA or protein sequences. To predict protein-coding seuquence, (1) `kmerslay extract-coding` performs six-frame translation on RNA-seq short reads and returns peptide sequences with higher than expected by chance matches to a known index, internally using (2) `kmerslay bloom-filter` to create an index of known protein-coding sequences. To compute $k$-mer similarities across sequences, (3) `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` $k$-merizes each sequence by running a sliding window of size $k$ along the sequence, extracting the $k$-long word, and computing the number of overlapping $k$-long sequences shared across pairs of sequences.
By sidestepping genome assembly, gene annotation, and homology assignment, `kmerslay` empowers non-model organism researchers to investigate their taxa of interest without fear.
