## Applications

### Installation

`kmerslay` can be installed with the Anaconda package manager, `conda` (preferred),

```
# Note: not actually on bioconda yet ... this is aspirational
conda install --channel bioconda kmerslay
```

or from the Python Package Index (PyPI) with the Python package manager, `pip`,

```
# Note: not actually on PyPI yet ... this is aspirational
pip install kmerslay
```

### Prediction of protein-coding sequences across a variety of species

We used `kmerslay extract-coding` to obtain putative protein-coding sequences from a comaparative transcriptomic dataset spanning nine species and six tissues [@doi:10.1038/nature10532].

### Read preprocessing

As the protein-coding score is assessed on the entire read, we recommend RNA-seq reads be removed of library artifacts to the best of the user's ability.
This means, the adapters should be trimmed, and if there was a negative insert size such that the R1 and R2 reads overlap, then the read pairs should be merged.


#### Creation of amino acid $k$-mer database with `kmerslay bloom-filter`

Before predicting protein-coding sequences, `kmerslay` must create a database of known amino acid $k$-mers, which is stored in the form of a probabilistic set membership data structure known as a bloom filter.
`kmerslay` uses the bloom filter implementation in `khmer`/`oxli` [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.6924.1; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0101271], called a NodeGraph.
We created a dataset of known amino acid $k$-mers from the manually annotated UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot databases [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1049; @doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-3167-5_2].
We used only protein sequences observed in *Opisthokont* species [@url:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opisthokont], previously known as a "Fungi/Metazoa" group that encompasseses "Fungus-like" *Holomycota* and "Animal-like" *Holozoa*. [NOTE: Does this need a figure/phylogenetic timetree?]

```
kmerslay bloom-filter \
  --tablesize 100000000 \
  --molecule protein \
  --peptide-ksize 7 \
  --save-as uniprot-reviewed_yes+taxonomy_2759__molecule-protein_ksize-7.bloomfilter \
  uniprot-reviewed_yes+taxonomy_2759.fasta.gz
```

#### Prediction of protein-coding sequences with `kmerslay extract-coding`

We then predicted protein coding reads using the created bloom filter using `kmerslay extract-coding`.

```
kmerslay extract-coding \
  --molecule protein \
  --coding-nucleotide-fasta SRR306800_GSM752653_ggo_br_F_1__coding_reads_nucleotides.fasta \
  --csv SRR306800_GSM752653_ggo_br_F_1__coding_scores.csv \
  --json-summary SRR306800_GSM752653_ggo_br_F_1__coding_summary.json \
  --jaccard-threshold 0.8 \
  --peptides-are-bloom-filter \
  uniprot-reviewed_yes+taxonomy_2759__molecule-protein_ksize-7.bloomfilter \
  SRR306800_GSM752653_ggo_br_F_1_trimmed.fq.gz > SRR306800_GSM752653_ggo_br_F_1__coding_reads_peptides.fasta
```

![Applications of `kmerslay extract-coding`. **A.** We simulated RNA-seq data using Opisthokonta species from the Quest for Orthologs dataset for true positive protein-coding RNAs, reads completely contained within intergenic, intronic, and UTR sequences as true positive noncoding RNAs, and reads partially overlapping a coding and noncoding region as an adversarial test set. We then predicted protein-coding sequences and computed false positive and false negative rates. False Positive coding reads were found to be ... False negative noncoding reads were found to be ... **B.** Number of putative protein-coding sequences per read. **C.** This method could also be used to extract only reads whose putative protein-coding sequences are transcription factors. **D.** We ran `kmerslay extract-coding` on the five tissues and nine species from the Brawand 2011 dataset.](images/SVG/figure2.svg){#sfig:figure2 tag="figure2" width="100%"}


### `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` is a simple method to identify homologs

![Applications of `kmerslay compare-kmer-content`. **A.** We used `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` on pairs of orthologous protein sequences between humans and the remaining Opisthokonta species in the Quest for Orthologs dataset. x-axis, $k$-mer size, y-axis, mean difference. **B.** False positive calls by `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` are either paralogs or read-through protein products. **C.** We applied `kmerslay compare-kmer-content` to ... to find putative orthologs. We found ... the accuracy was ...](images/SVG/figure4.svg){#sfig:figure4 tag="figure4" width="100%"}
